---
wip: 101
title: RP Request Authorization Method for Smart Contracts
description: Standard to verify a relying party proof request for a World ID Proof in Smart Contracts 
author: Paolo D'Amico (paolodamico)
status: Draft
created: 2026-03-18
---

## Abstract

This spec introduces a method to verify Relying Party (RP) proof requests in the World ID Protocol through on-chain smart contracts. As some RPs may not have a backend and be simply a contract, this allows OPRF Nodes to answer **"Does the RP authorize this request?"** in order to process relevant OPRF requests such as for nullifier generation.

## Motivation

**Context**: Proof requests from Relying Parties in the World ID Protocol MUST be signed in order to be recognized. This serves to ensure proofs are authorized for the intended recipient and reduce the surface area of post-compromise in Authenticators.

A Relying Party MAY be a Smart Contract without a backend. When this is the case, having a private key to sign the request is impractical or even impossible in a secure way. Hence, we need a way for Relying Parties to authorize the request in a way compatible with Smart Contracts.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

The term "contract" is used to refer to "Smart Contracts", both may be used interchangeably.

This specification introduces both concerns of "Authorization" and "Validation" of Relying Party (RP) Proof requests. When an RP requests a proof without a smart contract, they construct the proof request and sign on the data they constructed. If the RP does not have a backend or other trusted environment, they cannot control the inputs to the Proof request. Hence, the contract SHOULD implement validation rules for the request. For example, an RP should determine what is the maximum expiration period they should allow for Proof requests and enforce it during verification.

1. In order for a contract, acting as an RP, to be compatible with signature verification, it MUST conform to the following interface.
  ```solidity
  /**
   * @dev Interface of the WIP-101 standard for World ID,
   *   RP Request Authorization Method for Smart Contracts.
   */
  interface IWIP101 is IERC165 {
      /**
       * @notice Verifies a World ID Proof Request is authorized by the RP.
       * @dev Should return whether the RP request is valid and should be honored. The `rpId` is implicit in this request,
       *  any contract implementing this interface will be pointed to in the `RpRegistry`.
       * @param version The version determines the format of the request.
       * @param nonce Unique nonce for this request
       * @param createdAt Creation timestamp of the request
       * @param expiresAt Expiration timestamp specified for the request
       * @param action Provided action for the request. Importantly, this is already a hashed
       *  action as a field element.
       * @param data Arbitrary data useful for the verification.
       * @return magicValue The expected magic value when the request is valid. Reverts otherwise.
       * 
       * MUST return the bytes4 magic value 0x35dbc8de when function passes (function selector for verifyRpRequest).
       * MUST NOT modify state (view modifier for solc > 0.5)
       * MUST allow external calls
       */
      function verifyRpRequest(
          uint8 version,
          uint256 nonce,
          uint64 createdAt,
          uint64 expiresAt,
          uint256 action,
          bytes calldata data
      ) external view returns (bytes4 magicValue);
  }
  ```
2. If the request is not authorized, the `verifyRpRequest` MUST revert. Callers MUST treat any return value other than 0x35dbc8de as an invalid request.
3. The contract (implementer) MUST also adhere to [ERC-165](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-165) and return `true` from `supportsInterface` for `type(IWIP101).interfaceId`.
4. When a contract is deployed compliant with this spec, the contract address can be set as a `signer` in the `RpRegistry` contract (e.g. through the `updateRp` function).
5. The `verifyRpRequest` method will be used by OPRF Nodes to verify an incoming proof request before generating the required output to construct a `nullifier`. OPRF Nodes SHOULD enforce a gas limit of 100,000 gas when calling verifyRpRequest. Following the main threat model of this spec, OPRF Nodes MUST pass the `action` to the `verifyRpRequest` function as the exact query which will be used for OPRF computations.
6. OPRF Nodes MUST use WIP-101 verification if the `signer` in the `RpRegistry` implements [ERC-165](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-165) for `type(IWIP101.interfaceId)`. Otherwise the `signer` will be verified using regular ECDSA verification. OPRF Nodes MAY cache an RP's `signer` for up to 1 hour.
7. It is RECOMMENDED implementers ensure that any upgrades to validation logic are backwards-compatible for the duration of the maximum `expiresAt` window.

### Additional Context
The version of the [`ProofRequest`](https://docs.rs/world-id-primitives/latest/world_id_primitives/request/struct.ProofRequest.html) which is passed as `version` attribute to the `verifyRpRequest` function is currently defined in the [`RequestVersion`](https://docs.rs/world-id-primitives/latest/world_id_primitives/request/enum.RequestVersion.html) enum.


## Rationale

The `verifyRpRequest` allows an RP to verify all the inputs that would otherwise be signed, so any rules that an RP would normally use when constructing an off-chain request can be encoded in the RP's contract for pure on-chain interactions.

The rationale behind the arbitrary `data` is that the `action` is passed to this function already hashed into the field so nothing on the pre-image can be validated. Validating the content of the pre-image is something particularly important because it scopes the _uniqueness space_, i.e. it's an input to the `nullifier` of a proof.

This spec is inspired in [ERC-1271](https://github.com/ethereum/ercs/blob/master/ERCS/erc-1271.md).

## Reference Implementation

```solidity
contract WIP101Example is IWIP101, ERC165 {
    // bytes4(keccak256("verifyRpRequest(uint8,uint256,uint64,uint64,uint256,bytes)"))
    bytes4 internal constant MAGICVALUE = 0x35dbc8de;
    
    /**
     * @dev The RP request is not valid.
     */
    error InvalidRequest();

    /// @inheritdoc IWIP101
    function verifyRpRequest(
        uint8 version,
        uint256 nonce,
        uint64 createdAt,
        uint64 expiresAt,
        uint256 action,
        bytes calldata data
    ) external view returns (bytes4 magicValue) {
        if (version > 1) {
            revert InvalidRequest();
        }
        
        if (createdAt > block.timestamp || createdAt < block.timestamp - 15 minutes) {
            revert InvalidRequest();
        }

        if (expiresAt < block.timestamp || expiresAt > block.timestamp + 15 minutes) {
            revert InvalidRequest();
        }
        
        // production implementations are RECOMMENDED to validate nonce uniqueness
        
        // note the bitshift by 8 for the action to fit into the field; this is the same
        // method as in `FieldElement::from_arbitrary_raw_bytes` which is used in common SDKs
        uint256 expected_action = uint256(keccak256(abi.encodePacked("vote"))) >> 8;

        if (action != expected_action) {
            revert InvalidRequest();
        }

        return MAGICVALUE;
    }

    /// @inheritdoc ERC165
    function supportsInterface(bytes4 interfaceId) public view virtual override(ERC165, IERC165) returns (bool) {
        return interfaceId == type(IWIP101).interfaceId || super.supportsInterface(interfaceId);
    }
}
```

It is expected that under normal circumstances, the RP would still construct a Proof request. The key distinction with authorization through this specification versus authorization through an ECDSA signature is that the proof request would be **constructed in an untrusted environment (for example the user's web browser)**. Hence, why this specification also covers validation of the request.


## Recommended Validations

It is RECOMMENDED to implement the following validations for a Proof request:
1. It is RECOMMENDED implements reject a request which `version` is larger than the maximum known as future version changes MAY be incompatible with previous versions.
2. `createdAt` is not in the future and close to the current time.
3. `expiresAt` is not in the past and is not too far in the future. While "too far" is relative to each RP's use case, it's unlikely that a Proof request should be valid for more than 15 minutes. Note that sub-minute precision SHOULD generally NOT be relied upon on-chain.
4. `nonce` has not been used before. This is RECOMMENDED, however OPRF Nodes will still enforce a nonce is only used once. Nonce tracking within `verifyRpRequest` is not possible due to the `view` constraint. Implementers relying on nonce uniqueness SHOULD track used nonces in a separate transaction (e.g., when the proof is consumed on-chain).
5. `action` hash is the expected value.

## Security

1. The main threat model protected with this spec is authorization of RP Requests such that an authenticator (malicious or not) cannot generate `nullifier`s (or other OPRF outputs) for use with an RP without that RP's authorization. This for example helps protect users in post-compromise scenarios. If an RP implements proper authorization logic, even with a compromised authenticator, an attacker would be unable to compute a user's nullifier.
2. Implementers are solely responsible for the security of their validation logic. A `verifyRpRequest` that unconditionally returns the magic value is equivalent to having no authorization and exposes the RP to unbounded nullifier generation for any action as well as users in a post-compromise scenario.

## Backwards Compatibility

This World Improvement Proposal (WIP) introduces a new interface; no existing contracts or other previously existing functionality is affected.

## Copyright

Follows the repository's [MIT license](LICENSE).
